# https://postcard.news/the-outlandish-remark-by-shashi-tharoor-has-revealed-to-the-world-what-is-actually-wrong-with-the-congress-party/

Earlier, Statement of Hindu Pakistan and now a new controversy welcomed by this man! I wonder what has got into this Congressmen and what gives him the courage to talk nonsense.

The BJP party launched an intense attack on Congress MP Shashi Tharoor for his remarks about PM Narendra Modi donning “outlandish” headgear on his trips to the Northeast but refusing to sport a Muslim skull cap!!

The controversy was triggered after the MP while addressing a seminar said, “I ask you why does our Prime Minister wear all sorts of outlandish headgear wherever he goes around the country or around the world? Why does he always refuse to wear a Muslim skull cap? You see him in Naga headgears with feathers. You have seen him in various kinds of extraordinary outfits which is a right thing for a Prime Minister to do. Indira Gandhi has also been photographed wearing various kinds of costumes. But why he still always says no to one?”

“Why does he refuse to wear green, the colour that he says is identified with Muslim appeasement? What kind of talk it is?” Tharoor added.

Congress, through Shashi Tharoor, was making a mockery of democracy by asking silly questions targeting our PM. Another joker getting trained in Congress?? Can we expect the next question by him as: “Why does our PM refuse to consume beef?” It is so irresponsible on the part of an MP to be professional to this extent. An MP has to think twice before he makes a comment in public especially towards the PM of India.

Has any of the BJP leader ever asked or pointed out these questions:

1.Why the former PM Manmohan Singh for ten years did not wear saffron? Is he not a secular?
2. Why Gulam Nabi Azad, Salman Khurshid and other leaders of Congress did not wear saffron? Why didn’t they put tilak on forehead? Are they not followers of secularism?

This Muslim appeasement statements must be stopped by Congress, if not they will have their seats reduced to single digit in the next Lok Sabha Elections. Every Indian feels this would be the worth punishment for these Congressmen trying and placing their agendas purely for the sake of votes. Our PM has every right to promote their heritage and culture. Whenever he visits any state, he follows their custom and tradition. How come it is even relevant to Muslims or any other religion??

There was a time when Shashi Tharoor was a respected figure as an Author, a Diplomat and above all an eloquent Orator. But these days he has reduced himself into a pathetic politician trying to garner the support of vote banks with cheap gimmicks and stuck to his political superiors who themselves are a pathetic lot indulging in cheap mudslinging, hugging, winking and other clownish activities.

The statement from Tharoor was also insulting to the Nagas. Why is it okay for him to disrespect the traditional attire of the Nagas? Is it the same reason because of which Congress neglected North East for so many years? Is it because the number of seats in Lok Sabha from all of North East is meagre??

It’s such a shame that Congress along with Tharoor has reduced secularism to a mere fancy dress competition. Is secularism all about tokenism and minority appeasement or is it about respecting each and every religion? Unfortunately, the narrative of secularism he been heavily distorted by our politicians over the years and repeating over the time.