# https://postcard.news/barkha-dutt-finally-reveals-hates-narendra-modi-much/

Brkha Dutt in an interview has complained about Modi’s style of working which can be called one of the reasons why she hates Modi. When the anchor made a reference to Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi that they are very uptight and are never accessible to media. Barkha Dutt immediately took Modi’s name and said that he never talks to her other than saying HELLO.

She openly says that during Congress rule, even though Sonia and Rahul Gandhi never spoke to media, the government secretaries gave inside information to media outside press conference. She goes to say that including the National Security Advisor of the country and the principal secretary to the Prime minister used to interact with the media behind screen and gave many information.

Isn’t this shocking to know that NSA and the Principal secretary to the PM gave inside information and interacted with press??

Barkha Dutt says ever since Modi government took charge it has become extremely difficult to get information on government decisions and says no government officials speaks to media or journalists other than in Press conference. She also adds during Modi’s international visits, except government officials and MIB team, he takes no private media channel along with him, so they have to spend their own money to travel abroad.

Barkha Dutt openly says that Narendra Modi bypasses the main stream media and wants to connect directly with people, he doesn’t trust main stream media. So Barkha Dutt in a hesitant tone says that Modi never encourages the Main Stream Media and treats everyone as his enemy.

I guess this is the most candid interview Barkha Dutt has ever given to anyone. She has infact revealed all the controversial truth that during UPA regime the government officials gave her all information, including the NSA and PS to the Prime Minister.

Doesn’t this show to what level the UPA government functioned… Disclosing all secretive and important information to press.! Now the real pain of the media is seen since they have no role in setting agendas to suit their ideologies of anti nationalism or favour their political masters in so called secular parties.